---
layout: default
title: Our Approach
nav_order: 3
---

# Our Approach
Tips and standards for developing user-centered content.

### Content principles

#### Start with user needs.
Write in a way that suits the situation. Ask yourself: Who is going to read this? What do they need to know? How might they be feeling?
Help people find the information they need quickly and easily. Guide them through the process.

#### Do the hard work to make it simple.
Use plain language and simple sentences.
Choose clarity over cleverness.

#### Write for everyone.
Respect the complexity of our users’ experiences.
Be willing to be surprised about who’s reading your work.

#### Build trust.
Talk like a person.
Tell the truth.
Use positive language and concrete examples.

#### Start small and iterate.
Make sure your content works for users. Don’t be afraid to scrap what’s there and start over.
Write a draft, test it out, gather feedback, and keep refining.

### Address the user
Content on government sites often makes a direct appeal to the public to get involved or take action.
Address the user as you whenever possible. For example:
You can email us at info@defions.ai or find us on Twitter.
Learn more about starting your account.
If you’re creating content for multiple users—such as patients and their caregivers—address the primary user as you and refer to secondary users by their roles or titles.
We recommend against using the word citizens when talking about the public.

### Avoid duplication
If something is written once and links to relevant information easily and well, people are more likely to trust the content.  Duplicate content produces poor search results, confuses the user, and damages the credibility of our websites.
If users can find two similar pieces of content on a subject, they might end up calling a helpline or sending an email to the first address they find because they aren’t sure they have the right information.
There are thousands of federal websites.  Collectively, they host hundreds of millions of pieces of content.  What are you writing about? What are other agencies publishing?  Are users across the country and the world seeing a coherent view? How are we different?
Before you publish something, check that the user needs you’re trying to address has not already been covered:
- Search for the content using a popular search engine like Google or Bing.  This is how most users will start, too.  If content is already easy to find, duplicating it can lead us to compete with ourselves for search results.
- Often, Defions team members write about a government service, tool, or program.  Think authoritatively:  What department or agency controls the thing you’re writing about?  What information have they produced already?
- Start significant projects with a content audit.  Identify how any existing information is used and whether it will be helpful to your users in its current state.  If it isn’t, what must change for it to help you address your users’ needs?  Focus your work on those changes.

### Be concise
To keep content understandable, concise, and relevant, it should be:
- Specific
- Informative
- Clear and concise
- Brisk but not terse
- Incisive (friendliness can lead to a lack of precision and unnecessary words) but human (not something generated by a faceless machine)
- Serious but not pompous or emotionless—adjectives can be subjective and make the text sound more emotive and like spin

You should:
- Use contractions (such as can’t and won’t)
- Not let caveats dictate unwieldy grammar (for example, say You can rather than You may be able to)
- Use the language people are using
- Use Google Trends to check for common search terms
- Use short sentences
- Check sentences with more than 25 words to see if you can split them for clarity

Words ending in –ion and -ment tend to make sentences longer and more complicated than necessary.  Avoid turning verbs into nouns, a common sign of governmentese at work.

#### Keep sentences short and sweet
Craft sentences at 25 words or fewer, whenever possible.  If a sentence has fewer than 14 words, readers understand 90 percent of content.  At 25 words, sentences are markedly more difficult to comprehend.

We also recommend varying sentence length.  Switching things up helps you keep readers interested.  This tactic will also give you better control of your content’s tone — a text with only short sentences can unintentionally sound terse.  The occasional longer sentence adds a bit of narrative interest (and can help a piece of writing sound friendlier, too).

Here’s an example of how you might transform a too-long sentence into something more manageable.  Instead of:
- Due to privacy and logistical considerations, passes cannot be replaced if lost or stolen; a new Paper Voucher must be accessed by going to the everykidinapark.gov website and completing the same activities to obtain a new Paper Voucher.

Use:
- Unfortunately, we can’t replace lost or stolen passes.  Get a new pass by visiting everykidinapark.gov and signing up again.

### Use plain language
U.S. government websites are for everyone.  The content they contain should be as straightforward as possible.
One of the best ways to make content clear and usable is to use plain language.  When we use words people understand, our content is more findable, accessible, and inclusive.  Plain language is also mandatory for all federal government websites.
When we use jargon in our writing, we risk losing users’ trust. Government, legal, business jargon are often vague or unfamiliar to users, and can lead to misinterpretation.
Another temptation that can hurt readability is figurative language: it often doesn’t say what you actually mean, and can make your content more difficult to understand.  For example:
- drive (you can only drive vehicles, not schemes or people)
- drive out (unless it’s cattle)
- going forward (unless you’re giving directions)
- one-stop shop (we’re the government, not a big box store)

In most cases, you can avoid these figures of speech by describing what you’re actually doing. Be open and specific.
If you’re struggling to use plain language, try writing conversationally. Picture your audience and write as if you were talking to them one-on-one, with the authority of someone who can actively help.

#### Don’t use formal or long words when easy or short ones will do.  
Use buy instead of purchase, help instead of assist, about instead of approximately, and so on.
Plain language lists can help spot problem words and consider alternatives, but keep in mind that plain language is more than just a list of words to avoid—it’s a way of writing.

#### Words to avoid
- agenda (unless you’re talking about a meeting)
- advancing
- collaborate (use working with)
- combating (use working against or fighting)
- commit or pledge (we need to be more specific — we’re either doing something or we’re not)
- countering (use answering or responding)
- deliver (pizzas, mail, and services are delivered — not abstract concepts like improvements or priorities)
- deploy (unless you’re talking about the military or software)
- dialogue (we speak to people)
- disincentivize or incentivize
- empower
- execute (use run or do)
- facilitate (instead, say something specific about how you are helping)
- focusing
- foster (unless it’s children)
- illegals or illegal aliens (use undocumented immigrants)
- impact or impactful
- initiate (use start)
- innovative (use words that describe the positive outcome of the innovation)
- in order to (use to)
- key (unless it unlocks something, use important or omit)
- land (as a verb only use if you’re talking about aircraft)
- leverage (unless you use it in the financial sense)
- liaise (use collaborate, work with, or partner with)
- modify (use change instead)
- overarching
- progress (what are you actually doing?)
- promote (unless you’re talking about an ad campaign or some other marketing promotion)
- robust
- simple or simply (use straightforward, uncomplicated, or clear, or leave the descriptor out altogether)
- slimming down (processes don’t diet)
- streamline
- strengthening (unless you’re referring to bridges or other structures)
- tackling (unless you’re referring to football or another contact sport)
- thought leader (refer to a person’s accomplishments)
- touchpoint (mention specific system components)
- transforming (what are you actually doing to change it?)
- user testing (use user research or usability testing)
- utilize (use use)

#### When to use legal and technical terms
Present complicated information clearly so it’s easier to understand. If you need to include legal terms or technical language, include a short, plain-language summary or define your terms up front.
It’s fine to use technical terms when they’re appropriate for the audience or the situation, but you need to explain what they mean on the first reference.
If you’re publishing source code, see the Defions Style Guide for tips on making the project easy to use and understand.

#### Additional resources
- Federal Plain Language Guidelines
- Avoiding legal, foreign, and technical jargon
- King County: Shorter, simpler words
- Gov.uk: Plain English and Words to avoid

### Structure the content
Below you’ll find a few characteristics of online readers as well as our recommendations on ways to keep them in mind when writing and editing.

#### Important information first
Online, users tend to scan text until they find the information they need. No matter how carefully you craft your content, most people will only read 25 percent of it.  This statistic isn’t meant to dishearten; rather, we believe it underscores the importance of getting content right.
Put the most important information in the first two paragraphs.  That’s the section users are most likely to read. In journalism, this technique is called the “inverted pyramid.”

#### Break up text
Large chunks of text can overwhelm readers.  Use subheads and bullet points; they provide clear narrative structure for readers in a hurry.  Put information-carrying words at the beginning of the phrase, and use the active voice.
Instead of:
- Looking into the regulation of campaign finances

Use:
- Campaign finance law explained

If you’re wrangling a lot of data, tables can help you visualize that content.  Long paragraphs cluttered with numbers or dates are more difficult to scan than, for example:

# NEED TO FIX
Report type  |  Dates covered  |  Due
Quarterly (Form 3, 3Z, 3L)  |  January 1–March 31  |  April 15
April 1–June 30	July 15
July 1–September 30	October 15
October 1–December 31	January 31

#### Don’t use FAQs
Like our peers at GDS, we strongly discourage writing FAQs, or Frequently Asked Questions.
FAQs:
- Are hard to read and search for
- Duplicate other content on your site
- Are usually not questions asked by the public
- Mean that content is not where people expect to find it—it needs to be in context

If you’re thinking about posting FAQs, review the related content on your site and look for ways to improve it.  Take the necessary steps to give users the best possible experience.
Ask yourself:
- Is the content organized in a logical way?
- Can you group similar topics together?
- Is it easy to find the right answer?
- Is it clear and up-to-date?

If people are asking similar questions, the existing content isn’t meeting their needs.  Perhaps you need to rewrite it or combine several pieces of content. Pay attention to what users are asking for and find the best way to guide them through the process.

### Keep refining
Content design is an ongoing process, and even published content isn’t really “done,” in a traditional sense — it’s not a static entity.  To ensure that your content is helping users, you need to keep refining it over time.
When you’re creating content, it’s best to base your refinements on insights from users.  This section addresses ways to test your content’s effectiveness and includes tips for archiving and deleting content without disrupting the user experience.

#### Testing and ongoing research
Set aside time regularly to make sure your content works for users.  If you’re not sure where to start, check your web analytics to identify:
- Pages with high or low traffic
- Pages with high or low reading times
- Common search terms
- Common user flows within your site

You can also review:
- User feedback from surveys, call center logs, and support emails
- Recurring themes from channels like Twitter, Facebook, and tech blogs

You should make a habit of listening to users, too.  Conduct usability testing sessions regularly to understand how people access, use, and interpret key pieces of content on your site.  

#### Additional resources
- Testing Content, A List Apart
- What Does This Mean? Tips for Testing Your Words, GDS Blog
- Testing Web Content for Accessibility, WebAim
- Cloze Test for Reading Comprehension, Nielsen Norman Group

### Archiving and deleting content
You may occasionally need to archive or delete outdated content.  Maybe it’s irrelevant after a recent policy change or redundant with other pages on your site.  Avoid moving or deleting content without a good reason, because it can cause a lot of frustration for users.  Changes to site structure may also slow down users who’ve learned specific navigation paths on your site.
As part of ongoing site maintenance, you should audit your content to keep everything updated and identify potential duplication.  Depending on the size of your site, you may want to review everything on a yearly basis, for example, or look at one or two sections at a time.
Before you archive or delete anything, review your site analytics to understand how users are accessing the content now, and check in with the content owner or author to come up with a plan together.  Be sure to consider cases that may not show up in analytics data too, such as:
- Search engine results
- User bookmarks
- Links from external sites

Each of these can be addressed by ensuring you have redirects from the old URLs to the latest content.
When you’re looking at a particular page, think about the best way to meet user needs:
- Who is this content for?
- Is there a legal requirement for having it?
- How often do people visit this page?
- Are there any incoming links to it, either within your site or from popular referrers?
- Are there other pages that cover this topic? Can you combine them? Which one shows up higher in search results?
- Can you hide or archive the page instead of deleting it?
- Was this content meant to expire quickly? Was the website the right channel for this type of content — or should posts like this move to a blog, newsletter, or social media account in the future?

If you genuinely need to delete something, give users a path to find what they need.  This could include:
- URL redirects
- Ceding ownership of the content to another organization who can maintain it
- Keeping content around and adding context that it is depreciated or no longer maintained
- Making the content available elsewhere with an archiving service like the National Archives and Records Administration’s Government Web Harvests or the Internet Archive
- Custom 404 pages to help users find what they’re looking for

#### Additional resources
- Guidance on Managing Web Records, National Archives and Records Administration
- Withdrawing and Unpublishing Content, and Labelling Content from Previous Governments, GOV.UK
- Unpublishing and Withdrawing (‘Archiving’), GOV.UK
- Best Practice for Archiving and Deleting Content, Content Strategy Inc.
- How Should You Handle Expired Content?, Moz

### Giving and receiving feedback
Giving and receiving feedback on writing is hard.  Both need your time, energy, and care.  That may feel daunting.  But we all want our work to be strong and it only gets better with feedback.
The beauty of the writing process is that it’s iterative — everyone (yes, everyone) writes crappy first drafts.  The important thing is to share the draft, gather feedback, revise, and repeat.  Even published content isn’t really “done.”  It’s important to keep refining, and incorporating feedback from your readers is part of that process.
Here are some ways to approach giving and receiving writing feedback.

#### How to give feedback
Start by reading the piece in its entirety before editing or making comments.  Though you may be tempted to give line edits on an early draft, resist this temptation!  It’s likely that much of the text will change from draft to draft, so your line-editing work may be lost by the final draft. Focus on the central goal or message of the piece—not specific wording or stylistic decisions.  If you find yourself needing to comment on structural issues or key messages, it’s probably worth setting up a meeting to talk through things.
As you read, think about the answers to the following questions:
- Is it clear?
- Is it easy to follow?
- Are there any gaps or places you get lost?
- How might someone feel after reading this?
- Does it leave you with any questions?
- Are there any places that could use a story or concrete examples?
- Does it assume knowledge that the reader might not have?

Respond as a reader and tell the writer:
- What doesn’t feel right
- What doesn’t make sense
- What isn’t working — and what is!
- What you want to know more or less about, and why
- What questions you have
- What doesn’t reflect your own experience

Ask questions to help the writer revise:
- Who is the audience?
- Why does this matter?
- What does this mean?
- How does this help the reader?
- What’s the most important thing for people to understand?
- What do we want readers to do next?

When people ask for feedback, they’re looking for your thoughts on what aspects of their work could be stronger.  Even as you offer kindly worded suggestions for improvement, it’s nice to comment on what’s working in a piece, too.  Everyone likes to receive recognition for what they’ve done well.  Plus, you don’t want them to unknowingly change what’s working — sharing positive feedback can prevent them from doing so.
Everyone needs feedback, even professional writers.  Don’t second-guess yourself as the reader. You don’t have to have the solution or right answer.  Ask questions, let the writer know if something doesn’t make sense, and tell them what you like.  Finally, thank them for asking for your feedback. It’s not easy, and it shows that they care about the work and their reader.

#### How to receive feedback
It’s natural to feel timid about sharing your work, especially if it’s an early draft.  But sharing work early in the writing process has great benefits.  Your colleagues can help you identify the strengths and weaknesses of your piece, which can help you narrow your focus and determine which sections need the most work.  Likewise, your colleagues can point out interesting areas that you could expand on.
If you’re apprehensive about sharing your work, it can be helpful to label documents as drafts to help frame your readers’ expectations and perceptions.  For example: ‘First draft: Giving feedback on writing.’ Sharing drafts with one person, rather than a larger group, can also help you ease into the process.
First, be clear about the type of feedback you’re looking for to ensure you get comments that are useful for the stage of writing you’re in. Here’s a summary of some types of feedback you can ask for and at what stage:
- Collaborative:  These are some initial rough ideas—feel free to dig in and change anything.
- High-level edits:  Observations about a piece’s general concept, structure, and intent — are most useful for early drafts.  Are the big ideas coming through? Does the structure make sense? Is the flow logical?
- Line edits:  Better suited to later, more finalized drafts, whose ideas are fleshed out and which could benefit from some polish. How’s the voice and tone? Is the writing clear and consistent? What doesn’t make sense?
- Copyediting:  We’re about to publish this — are there typos or awkward phrases?

If your piece needs additional context, share it.  There are all types of context that might be helpful: background information, strategies that have been tried in the past (and since abandoned), any legal considerations, audience needs or insights from research, or variations between our house style and a client’s content conventions.
If you have a deadline, be honest and realistic about it.  And if you’re unsure about how long it will take your reader to give feedback, be honest about that, too — it’s OK to ask them whether your expectations align with their timeframe.
Lastly, show appreciation.  Giving feedback takes time and energy. Thank the person for taking the time to read your piece and share their thoughtful observations.  Consider sharing the end result with them so they can see how their feedback helped you.

#### Additional resources
- You’re My Favorite Client, Chapter 4 by Mike Monteiro. It’s available on Safari Books.
- Questions I ask when reviewing design, Jason Fried
- Writing Comments in the Margins, Washington University
- The Power of Bad Ideas, Steve Portigal

### Make content web-friendly
One of the simplest ways to present accessible, maintainable information online is to use HTML.
It can be tempting to choose file formats that are more convenient for the author, such as PDF or Word.  However, presenting content in PDF, Word, or similar formats can make content much harder to use.
Therefore, we strongly recommend using HTML for all web content. Here are some of the benefits:
- It’s much easier to link to specific pages or sections of HTML pages.
- It’s much easier to update and maintain HTML content.
- HTML content avoids breaking the user out of their browsing flow, and maintains the context of the site’s navigation and structure. Conversely, this often means that HTML pages are easier to re-find and less likely to be “orphaned” or left online beyond their usefulness.
- All web content should be accessible, and this is much easier to accomplish and enforce with HTML content. It is possible to create accessible PDFs, but requires significant specialized training and effort for each document.
- HTML content is generally more accessible to search engines, and even within a page, HTML content is often more searchable and scannable for users seeking specific information.
- HTML content is much more responsive-friendly (especially on responsive websites), and some systems don’t display PDFs within the browser.  This makes for a confusing user experience and may cause some users to be unable to view or find the PDF at all.

Here are some alternate approaches for situations in which people often choose PDFs:
- When the content includes images, tables, or other graphics that you aren’t sure how to display in existing page templates:  Instead, work with a designer or your web publishing team to explore how you can translate the information you need into native web content.
- Formal or policy documents that are infrequently or never updated:  Instead of using PDF to convey permanence, use document structure, clear timestamps, and design cues to help users understand the context they need to interpret the document.
- Manuals or other long documents:  These are especially crucial to make available as HTML content, especially because they often need to be kept up-to-date as technology or processes change.  If you expect users to need offline access, support PDF as an alternate format or ensure clean, useful print stylesheets so that users can generate their own PDF.

PDF-first may be the appropriate choice for content that’s primarily and only intended for print use.  This might include brochures, business cards, or forms that must submitted as paper copies. (Though a better long-term approach is to change forms and processes so people can submit soft copies or complete the form online.)
If you do choose to present content in PDF, remember to ensure the information is also available on your website in an accessible, linkable, and responsive HTML format.
Avoid using formats for which users need specific, proprietary software (for instance, Microsoft Word, PowerPoint, Pages).


