# Personas

## Contracting Officers & Program Managers
What is a contract for our business is a career decision for contracting officers (COs) and program managers.  On most acquisitions, the PM and the CO (or KO, as it's often abbreviated, particularly in defense) are the most crucial decision-makers.  The program manager will be responsible for oversight of all the requirements in the proposal and of its execution once underway.  The CO/KO can later modify the contract to add scope.  While PMs and COs appreciate the big idea, they are also intensely interested in the nuts and bolts and our capability to deliver. Every contract is an act of trust between these two positions and our company.  These are experienced government personnel with whom we want to build a long-term brand relationship as a trusted advisor. Depending on the size of the contract, they may not be subject matter experts in all technologies involved, but will likely understand enough to separate contractor-speak from actual capability.  Delivery capability matters to this persona.

## End Users
The role of a federal contractor is never solely IT for IT's sake or product for the product's purpose.  It's about empowering the end-user to accomplish the agency's mission.  And while the end-user, be it a help desk technician, a service member or a scientist, won't sign a contract, their opinion of your product or service, particularly once it's in use, will heavily influence whether it continues to be in use.   Before the acquisition, a groundswell of support could be cause for a pilot program.  Market to the end-users pain points, rather than a technology-first view.

## Directors & Government Executives
These are typically the big idea crowd.  They're usually looking for what is next.  Their interests are less day-to-day and more focused on how to better achieve their agency's mission.  Significant changes begin at this level, whether it is a product like a weapon system or a federal cloud-first mandate, which has reshaped Federal IT since its issuance by the then Chief Technology Officer of the United States.  In the Intelligence Community, the largest IT transformation in its history began as a plan issued by the Director of National Intelligence.  Be bold and be visionary. If we want to change the government's mindset radically, this is where we enter the bloodstream.  Personnel in these positions aren't always technically savvy and often have a more generalist approach to their departments, but they're still eager to find the next great idea.  They're intensely focused on mission achievement, so we need to help them understand how our capabilities, solutions, and services help them better achieve their department's goals.   There are a few sub-types of this persona worth consideration:
### Chief business-led innovation officer
This is typically a board-level position with visibility at the most senior levels of an organization's business and technology divisions.  This type of CTO is common in industry sectors that have been or will be, heavily driven by market disruptions — such as retail, technology, media, telecom, and banking.  The role has a very broad scope and impact, with the potential to be applied to all kinds of businesses as the world becomes more digital.  However, it requires vision and commitment from executive leaders to ensure the CTO can be effective in delivering against such a broad remit.  Typical responsibilities include: Partnering with business executives to identify, rationalize, and roadmap new business models and capabilities.  Leading business units that drive innovative and strategic thinking for the company, such as enterprise architecture, innovation management, and R&D.  Holding the funding and decision-making authority for innovation-driven technology investments.
### Chief technology innovation officer
This persona typically holds an executive position within IT and reports to the CIO.  This type of CTO is a technology visionary who leads groups such as enterprise architects, innovation managers, and professionals and specialists with shared IT services.  The approach of this CTO is often that of pushing technology best practices toward the main business functions while providing architectural oversight on how these technologies are deployed within the organization.  Typical responsibilities include: Determining how mainstream and emerging technologies should be used to advance business strategy.  Serving as the central point for technology innovation within IT.  Making key decisions on technology investments.  Piloting and establishing emergent platforms (e.g., digital platforms).
### Chief innovation guru
Sometimes referred to as the chief architect, this type of CTO is often an individual contributor operating in a small-to-midsize business or within an industry focused on providing expert business or technical knowledge.  Typical responsibilities include: Serving as a thought leader who provides senior executives with guidance on which mainstream and emerging technologies to use to advance business strategy.  Contributing lightweight governance frameworks for technology use, and advising on key technology decisions.  Engaging in pilots of emerging technologies.
### Chief operating officer of IT
This is a typical role in businesses that do not look at the IT and technology departments for thought leadership or innovation.  Typically, in very large organizations with significant IT headcount, the CTO is focused on the day-to-day running of IT.  This frees the CIO to work at a more strategic level across the business. Typical responsibilities include:  Running and maintaining IT operations through all or some of the following: IT service management, vendor management, shared IT services, data center, telecommunications, and security.  Assisting in developing the vision and roadmap to execute current and future company goals and objectives to provide the best technology.  Ensuring that internal and external systems are running and performing as they should be actively monitoring and responding to incidents that might affect highly available and performant systems.  Engaging in major decisions and procurement of technology centered on technology modernization, optimization, and consolidation, as well as major IT systems such as CRM or ERP.
### Chief operational technology officer
In industries where technology is a vital part of the company's product or product delivery, CTO is often used to mean the person in charge of that technology — sometimes called operational technology (OT).  For example, in a telecom company, the CTO may be in charge of the telecom network, while the CIO is in charge of internal IT.  In this scenario, the CTO and CIO often have separate lines of reporting.  Typical responsibilities include: Working collaboratively with the product and engineering teams on the development of new products as well as product enhancements and product redesign.  Establishing and communicating requirements in acquiring technology applications, services, systems, and equipment; negotiating and managing vendor contracts to cost, safety, and performance standards.  Ensuring internal and external systems are safe and secure as well as running and performing as they should, by actively monitoring and responding to incidents that might affect highly available and performant systems.




